1 Introduction
Thegoalofthisassignmentistogainexperiencewithsocketsandnetworkprogramming. Inthis
assignment, youwill implementatoyclient/serverarchitecture: aserver thatcountsprintable
characters(PrintableCharactersCounterorPCC).Clientsconnecttotheserverandsendita
streamofbytes.Theservercountshowmanyofthebytesareprintableandreturnsthatnumberto
theclient.Theserveralsomaintainsoverallstatisticsonthenumberofprintablecharactersithas
receivedfromallclients.Whentheserverterminates, itprintsthesestatisticstostandardoutput.
2 Assignmentdescription
Youneedtoimplementtwoprograms,aserverandaclient:
1. Server(pcc_server):TheserveracceptsTCPconnectionsfromclients.Aclientthatconnects
sendstheserverastreamofNbytes(Nisdeterminedbytheclientandisnotaglobalconstant).
Theservercountsthenumberofprintablecharactersinthestream(aprintablecharacter isa
bytebwhosevalueis32≤b≤126).Oncethestreamends,theserversendsthecountbackto
theclientoverthesameconnection.Inaddition,theservermaintainsadatastructureinwhichit
countsthenumberoftimeseachprintablecharacterwasobservedinall theconnections.When
theserverreceivesaSIGINT(e.g.,whentheuserpressescontrol-c), itprintsthesecountsand
exits.
1
2. Client (pcc_client): The client creates a TCP connection to the server and sends it the contents
of a user-supplied file. The client then reads back the count of printable characters from the
server, prints it, and exits.
2.1 Client specification
Implement the following program in a file named pcc_client.c. The following details the specifica
tion of the program.
Command line arguments:
• argv[1]: server’s IP address (assumed to be a valid IP address).
• argv[2]: server’s port (assumed to be a 16-bit unsigned integer).
• argv[3]: path of the file to send.
You should validate that the correct number of command line arguments is passed, and detect
errors while opening the file (e.g., if it doesn’t exist) and reading it. You may assume that all
arguments, when provided, are valid.
The flow:
1. Open the specified file for reading.
2. Create a TCP connection to the specified server port on the specified server IP.
3. Transfer the contents of the file to the server over the TCP connection and receive the count of
printable characters computed by the server, using the following protocol:
(a) The client sends the server N, the number of bytes that will be transferred (i.e., the file
size). The value N is a 32-bit unsigned integer in network byte order.
(b) The client sends the server N bytes (the file’s content).
(c) The server sends the client C, the number of printable characters. The value C is a 32-bit
unsigned integer in network byte order.
4. Print the number of printable characters obtained to stdout using exactly the following printf()
format string:
"# of printable characters: %u\n"
5. Exit with exit code 0.
Guidelines:
• Use the inet_pton() function for converting a string containing an IP address to binary
representation.
• Use only system calls to access files. Don’t use C library functions such as fopen().
• You can assume that the size of the file can be represented with a 32-bit unsigned integer.
• There’s no need to clean up file descriptors or free memory when exiting.
2
Error handling:
• Donot assume that you can allocate a buffer whose size is equal to the file size, because the file
size might be huge. Allocations of up to 1MB are OK.
• Argument validation: You only need to validate the number of command line arguments. You
may assume that all provided arguments are valid. However, you must still handle errors that
arise from using these arguments (e.g., file doesn’t exist, connection refused).
• Onany error condition, print an error message to stderr containing the errno string (i.e., with
perror() or strerror()) and exit with exit code 1.
2.2 Server specification
Implement the following program in a file named pcc_server.c. The following details the specifica
tion of the program.
Command line arguments:
• argv[1]: server’s port (assumed to be a 16-bit unsigned integer).
You should validate that the correct number of command line arguments is passed.
The flow:
1. Initialize a data structure pcc_total that will count how many times each printable character
was observed in all client connections. The counts are 32-bits unsigned integers.
2. Listen to incoming TCP connections on the specified server port. Use a listen() queue of size
10.
3. Enter a loop, in which each iteration:
(a) Accepts a TCP connection.
(b) When a connection is accepted, reads a stream of bytes from the client, computes its
printable character count and writes the result to the client over the TCP connection (using
the protocol described above). After sending the result to the client, updates the pcc_total
global data structure. You don’t need to handle overflow of the pcc_total counters.
4. If the server receives a SIGINT signal (for example, user hits Ctrl-C) perform the following actions:
(a) If the server is processing a client when SIGINT is delivered, finish handling this client
(including updating the pcc_total global data structure).
(b) For every printable character, print the number of times it was observed to standard output.
Use exactly the following printf() format string to print the count of each character:
"char '%c' : %u times\n"
• Only print characters that appear at least once; do not print characters with zero
occurrences.
• Print the characters in ascending ASCII order.
(c) After printing the character statistics, print the total number of clients that were successfully
served (i.e., clients whose connection completed without error and whose statistics were
added to pcc_total). Use exactly the following printf() format string:
"Served %u client(s) successfully\n"
3
(d) Exit with exit code 0.
(e) Handling of SIGINT must be atomic with respect to processing of client requests. We define
“processing a client” as the period of time starting when accept() returns the client’s socket
and until closing its socket. Therefore:
• If SIGINT is delivered when no client is being processed, no new client connection
may be accept()ed and processed.
• If SIGINT is delivered while a client is being processed, that client connection must be
processed to completion.
• There’s no requirement for accept()ing and/or handling pending connections in the
listen queue after a SIGINT. For example, if SIGINT is delivered while a client is being
processed, the program should print its statistics and exit after finishing processing that
client, and not worry about any pending connections that have not been accept()ed
yet.
Guidelines:
• You define the data structures required to implement the above specification. All that is required
is for the program to behave as specified above.
• Use bind() to the address INADDR_ANY to accept connections on all network interface. See the
ip(7) manual page for more details.
• Usethe SO_REUSEADDR socket option to enable reusing the port quickly after the server terminates.
See the socket(7) manual page for more details. (To see why, try omitting this option and then
killing and quickly restarting the server with the same port argument.)
• Donot assume that you can allocate a buffer whose size is equal to the file size, because the file
size might be huge. Allocations of up to 1MB are OK.
• There’s no need to clean up file descriptors or free memory when exiting.
• Client handling of EINTR: The client does not install signal handlers and should not expect
SIGINT to be handled gracefully. If a system call in the client returns EINTR, you may treat it as
an error and exit. In practice, if the user hits Ctrl-C while the client is running, the client will
simply be terminated by the default signal handler.
Error handling:
1. Client connections may terminate unexpectedly due to TCP errors. You can assume that a TCP
error occurs if and only if a system call sending/receiving data to/from the client returns an
error with errno being one of ETIMEDOUT, ECONNRESET, or EPIPE. Client connections may also
terminate if the client process is killed unexpectedly; this case is indicated by a system call
receiving data from the client returning 0 (i.e., EOF). If a client connection terminates due to
such TCP errors or unexpected connection close:
• Do not exit the server. Just print an error message to stderr and keep accepting new
client connections.
• Thepcc_total statistics must not reflect the data received on the (terminated) connection.
2. If a system call fails as part of the program’s design (for example, EINTR after receiving a signal),
you do not have to treat it as an error that requires exiting the program (since it’s part of your
intended flow).
4
3. On any other error condition, print an error message to stderr containing the errno string (i.e.,
with perror() or strerror()) and exit with exit code 1.
3 Relevant system calls and functions
1. Learn about and use the following: socket(), connect(), bind(), listen(), accept(), htonl(),
ntohl(), htons(), ntohs(), and setsockopt().
2. Read the manual page ip(7) for more information.
3. Read the manual page signal(7) and the sigaction() documentation.
4 Useful information & tips
• /dev/urandom is a pseudo device file that returns random bytes. You can read() from it
repeatedly and keep getting random bytes forever. You can use this device to generate files with
non-printable characters, for testing.
• The IP address 127.0.0.1 specifies the local host (it is called a loopback address). If you don’t
know the IP address of your machine, or are working on a VM without an Internet connection,
you can still connect to 127.0.0.1.
• Notice that TCP ports less than 1024 are reserved and cannot be used by non-root processes;
you will get an error if the server tries to bind() to such a port.
• You can use the nc (netcat) program to simulate a server or client.
• You can use the ngrep program to monitor the traffic on a specific port. (You will first need to
run sudo apt install ngrep to install this program.) Running ngrep requires root permissions,
so you’ll need to run it using sudo.
5 Submission instructions
1. Submit two files, pcc_server.c and pcc_client.c. (Don’t submit them in one ZIP file!)
2. Document your code with explanations for every non-trivial part of your code. Help the grader
understand your solution and the flow of your code.
3. The programs must compile cleanly on the course VM (no errors or warnings) when the
following command is run in a directory containing the relevant source code file:
gcc-O3-D_POSIX_C_SOURCE=200809-Wall-std=c11 pcc_server.c (or pcc_client.c)
5
